Now, Professor Dease, I would like you to explain
to me your interest and how your interest in
oceanography developed. Well, I was a student at
the University of Illinois back in the 30s, and I
became interested in geology, as in those days
most people did, either by being what we now call
rock hounds or by paleontology, vertebrate
paleontology, but I... interested in geology
through a colleague in collecting minerals from
New Jersey around the famous localities of
Franklin Furnace and also through contact with
the American Museum of Natural History in New York
and this is basically why I became interested in
geology and with that background I went to the
University of Illinois for no good reason. I went
there to be far away from home. I thought that was
sort of out in Indian country, being born in New
Jersey. But my
mother was recently deceased, and my father was
just beginning of the Depression years, and
things were very difficult financially. So I
hitchhiked out there and reported in. I presented
myself and was accepted. My brother-in-law had
been there at the University of Illinois. And I
went through seven years of school, by the way, at
the University of Illinois on a total budget of
$400, which is being rather remarkable. That is
about $400 outside help from my family. The rest I
earned my own way all the way through. But in my
junior year, I became under the influence of two
professors there. One was Francis, Francis
Shepherd, and the other was Harold, Harold
Wanless. Harold Wanless, his son now, Harold
Wanless, is now a, on the staff across the street at
Rosenstiel. But, Shepherd, at that time, I guess I
was just in my senior year then, and he was
beginning his work in marine geology. You asked
why people become interested in oceanography in
those days. I think oceanography was a rich man's
hobby in the 30s. And prior to that, it was people
who were yachtsmen and interested in the sea and
had the means or connection to pursue these
interests.
Well, we can come back to that. But anyway, Shepard
at that time received a applied for and received a
grant to study the submarine canyons off the
California coast from the Geological Society of
America. And this was a grant for $10,000 from the
newly established Penrose Fund. Penrose was a
mining engineer who made substantial sums of
money, I believe, mainly in the copper mines of
northern Michigan. And he left a big question. As I
recall, it was $3.5 million to the, something of
that order, to the Geological Society of America
and an equal amount to the Philosophical Society
of Philadelphia.
And this grant was of unheard of size. Because most
grants before that time had been maybe up to
$1,000. But to have a $10,000 grant was rather
unheard of. It was unique. That would be 1936, I
suppose. Now, Shepard, with that money, proposed
going to Scripps and
using an oceanographic vessel, the E.W. Scripps,
for an entire year. Plus, all the expenses
involved in $10,000. This also would be rather
remarkable nowadays, because even as of 10 years
ago, the cost of a ship was something like $1 per ton
per day. And now I suppose the cost is something
like $2 per ton per day for the use of a ship. In other
words, $10,000 might last you two days. But in
those days, it was programmed to last a year, at
least six months usage of a boat, which we in fact
essentially got. six months at sea. Well anyway,
Shepard was a professor at University of Illinois
and he was
came from a rather wealthy family and
he had became interested in, he had his PhD from
Chicago and came to Illinois and he was in
structural geology but I guess he went back to
Marblehead and became interested in collecting
sediments on the shelf off the Atlantic coast and
he discovered that they didn't just decrease from
coarse to fine as was the classic idea offshore but
there was a very random distribution of sediments
and he developed his interest in marine geology.
And he, I think, is properly recognized as the
father of oceanography, at least for the U.S. And a
good many students all over the country now are his
students, or students of his students. And he
wrote his first paper with George Coee, but then
with this grant he enlisted Emory, Kenkel Emory
and myself, students at the University of
Illinois, to work with him. Well, in fact, I guess
he enlisted Emory. Emory had just arrived in his
junior year from, he had spent two years in school
at Texas, and he had gone to the San Diego World's
Fair of 1935, and to let you know how penurious
things were in those days. He came back riding the
rods in a railroad train. When he got as far as
Illinois, it became too tired to go any further. He
got off and went to school for that reason. This is
how he chose Illinois, because he was tired of
riding that freight train. But Emory,
I think, is the only true genius I've ever known.
And you can describe genius as being 99% work. He
was a really dedicated and a worker. And at that
time, Shepard
was working up what we call the boat sheets of the
Coast and Geodetic Survey. He was contouring the
boat sheets. He was making topographic maps,
particularly of the California region,
bathymetric maps based upon the USGS contour
sheets. And Emory was doing this, mainly the basic
contouring. And I got involved in a small way. But
when this grant came through, rather
than Shepard really hiring me, I learned about it.
And I went to Shepard. I guess I was sufficiently
aggressive to hunt him out and suggest this
myself. And he accepted the fact that I also should
join the project. And with that, began my series of
sojourns to California with Emory and with
Shepard. And
Shepard was remarkable in that he not only
accepted us as his students, we became really part
of his family. We both lived in his attic room in his
house there in Urbana, Emory and I. But we began a
series of trips to California.
spending a semester at Illinois and a semester in
the summer at Scripps. I guess this first year we,
and working on this project, first on this one
grand of $10,000, I
think this money was spent, well, Emery and I
received $30 a month. We received a dollar a day for
our services.
And this involved going back and forth to Scripps,
hitchhiking. We went hitchhiking, or one time I
went to Chicago and joined one of these carpools.
And I went all the way to California for $10 in a
carpool. So this is the sort of operation you ran in
those days. Yes?
Did the romance of sea have anything to do with you
choosing to work with Professor Shepherd? Oh,
yes, definitely.
The sea was an
interesting environment. It was an environment
where the sea only reflected the sky. We didn't
have any idea what was beneath the sea, and they
were very rather classical and primitive ideas. I
guess the amount of or the lack of knowledge of the
sea was remarkable in those days. we knew there
were submarine canyons. We knew there was a
continental shelf, and we knew there was a
continental slope. We knew nothing, essentially
nothing, about the topography or the
geomorphology of the deep ocean, and only very
primitive information upon the sediments of the
continental shelf and the nature of what we now
call the shelf break. The state of knowledge was
remarkably primitive. Did this encourage you to
enter the field? It seems like the field has been an
uncertain future for geologists. Well, not only
uncertain, it had no future because there's no
demand for something which hasn't been invented
yet. And Shepard did it out of love of the sea. He was
a yachtsman and raised by the sea, and he had this
basic lore and love of a New Englander for the sea.
His father was another famous yachtsman. In the
case of Emery and myself, we knew nothing about the
sea, but we were intrigued by the mystery of the
sea.
But being a marine geologist, the word had been
invented. Even being an oceanographer, it hadn't
been invented. And this was analogous with a
person opting to be a poet. And when you said you
were doing oceanography, people said, what's
that? You went to Scripps and there was a, where
Scripps Institution now is, there was the only
sign on the road going out there that said, public
sign, put up the highway department and said, fish
lab, pointing out fish lab two miles. That was the
only people in town in La Jolla didn't really
realize that this was a marine biologic
laboratory or even an oceanographic laboratory.
This was a general state of knowledge. Well, did
you feel any hesitancy about trying this, or were
you just young and anxious? Well, no hesitancies
at all, no. A matter of being young and aggressive
and interested. And besides, there really wasn't
much to turn to, because
the employment situation was so bad that you
really You didn't have people advising you on
careers. And even at these wages, this at least was
a job, was something to do, and something very
exciting to do. But it was just like being a poet. My
other interest when I was a child was from reading
books of science, like James Dean's.
I became interested in also in astronomy as a child
from reading books by James Jeans and Eddington.
And this was also on a par with, I guess, being a
poet. There were no careers in astronomy. And so I
think the practicality of doing geology perhaps
is one reason why I went in that direction. As far as
being an oceanographer or a marine geologist,
this was on par with it. with being a poet nowadays.
I hope being a poet in the future isn't always such a
bleak field. It shouldn't be. It's very useful.
How would you explain then, for example, let's say
Stetson and Shepherd's decision to ply the field
separately and on different coasts and yet kind of
simultaneously? Well,
this was perhaps fortuitous.
Shepard was a New Englander, and he came to
University of Illinois. And he had visited the
West Coast and did this very preliminary work on
submarine canyons and became intrigued with the
West Coast. And of course, the submarine canyons
were accessible because they come right on to the
beach line. And you could survey them by rowboat,
by lead line, and by very, very simple techniques.
of investigating Submarine Canyon. So I think
this is why his thrust was towards the West. So he
became a Californian by adoption. Stetson, I
think, also was, in a sense, an oceanographer as a
rich man's hobby. I'm not sure whether he was very
wealthy, but I guess he was reasonably so. Other
examples, of course, of this, of the rich man's
hobby, is this is how many people got in. Columbus,
Disneyland, for example, and I think it also
applies to Roger Revelle. But this was more or less
the background of early oceanographers. I mean,
going back to Alexander
Agassiz and the Albatross in the turn of the
century, these people were people of wealth who
became interested in the sea.
Was it easier to acquire a vessel in the 30s? I was
amazed that you were able to acquire the scripts
for six months with what seems to be not a great deal
of effort. Now there's a couple of your waiting
lists frequently. Well, the E.W.
Scripps was acquired from Louis Stone, a
Hollywood actor, and either purchased or given to
Scripps. The previous history of oceanographic
vessels, including the early vessel scrips that
had caught on fire and burned. And this is also as
typical of many, of early oceanography, as many,
many, many tragic happenings with oceanographic
ships. The French ship, the Puercoipa, the
Carnegie that burnt in the Pacific, the
non-magnetic ship and so forth. But the E.W.
Scripps was acquired from a Hollywood actor at
nominal, a very small cost. I guess it was
purchased through the funds of of Robert Scripps,
who was, I guess, the son of Ellen Browning and E.W.
Scripps. But
then, as now, there were no funds to run ships. You
could acquire ships, but you didn't have funds.
The whole budget of Scripps Institution when I was
there was $125,000.
Our budget for running our marine geology lab was
$50 a year, buying all the equipment, chemicals,
glassware.
So Scripps had that ship, and Harold Sverdip had
just arrived. And he wanted to do a serial
collection of oceanographic data, but he didn't
have the funds to operate the ship. So Shepard came
along with money. albeit a small amount. I think it
may be the cost of what he put into the, I guess he put
in about maybe $6,000 of the $10,000 just for into
the operating ship, worth about $1,000 a month for
about six months operation. So that's how that
came about.
Now, describe very briefly the shipboard routine
that you went through on this early vessel. Did
you, for example, handle all the cooking
yourself, or do you have special duties and
watches? Well, we did everything. The crew
consisted of a skipper, an engineer, and one mate
deckhand. In other words, a crew of three. And I
guess we also, on long trips, we had a cook crew of
four. Otherwise, the scientists also acted as
technicians. We stood watches. We were on the
helm, and we stood watches of, I guess, six on, six
off, or four on, eight off, or whatever. And we also
operated all the... the winches, all the
equipment, and also
did all the chemical work aboard. We did the
analyses for phosphates and nitrates aboard
ships. So the scientific staff, which may have
been another four or five people, was not
specialized as of today. We stood all the watches
and ran the echo sounder and recorded the
soundings.
This was very good. This made us really, because
E.W. Scripps was a very small ship. It was 96 feet,
and it only had a freeboard of three or four feet. We
really felt close to the sea, and the decks were
awash and developed a very intimate relationship
to the sea. It's not as intimate as a scuba diver
gets today, but it was a much more intimate
relationship than you have aboard modern ships
when you're I mean, being right on the sea and being
in the splash and seeing the water is a lot
different from being up on a large ship removed
from the sea, really, being dry. What were scripts
like when you arrived? The staff could not have
been very large. No, there was a
half a dozen scientists. Perhaps the most eminent
one was the newly arrived Harold Sverdrup, but
really the classical naturalist was Sumner, who
worked on evolution problems. And he was a real
classical naturalist. He was the Carl Hubbs of
those days. Now the naturalist there is Carl
Hubbs, as you probably know. In any scientific
laboratory, like at Scripps, which for example,
at Scripps, Just a few years back, I came to Scripps
with a, I lived and living in the Ohio, and I arrived
at Scripps with a mushroom or a fungus from my yard,
and I couldn't find anybody in the whole place who
could tell me what it was except for Carl Hubbs, and
right away he could tell me the genus and species.
It was Amanita phalloides, which is a very
poisonous one, but he was the person you would go to
for any questions of general.
In Illinois, we had Professor Wanless, who was a
man of this type, who more or less had very broad
general knowledge. But Scripps was, and before
that Sumner was this type of person. He was a
nationalist there, and it was very primitive by
modern standards. Only that one Ritter Hall and
Scripps Hall were there. We had one one secretary
for the entire Scripps Institution, director
secretary. She also, I guess, was business
manager, as well as being secretary, and a very
small staff.
What were your first interests when you arrived at
Scripps? Towards what did you try to drive your
geological training?
We were assistants to Francis Shepard, of course,
and our interest was
getting to sea on EW scripts as soon as possible.
And to build and design the equipment, we needed to
investigate the topography and the submarine
canyons and the offshore. This involved right
away in making making dredges, coring devices,
current meters, sediment traps. The EWS Cripps
had a new echo sounder aboard it, one of the early
submarine signal flashing light. It was not a
recording echo sounder, but it was the latest
thing in echo sounding because part of that you
simply had to lower a line with a weight on it, but
now they had a sonic echo sounder. And so we had to
get all the equipment together and get it working
and even design things. You couldn't buy things
off the shelf. And so we had to look through
literature and see what had been made and make our
own and make new ones. And we also had to do this at a
very little expense. We had to go down and pick up
lead in the scrap yard and melt it down and make
weights and design our own coring device. gravity
type. Emery and I designed what was then a new type
of coring device. And also at that time, Shepard
invested a substantial amount of his money, which
was $1,000, in the abortive Varney-Redwine
hydrostatic corer, which was, as you probably
will hear something about in these recordings,
did not actually work. The whole thing collapsed
and imploded. But anyway, this was one of the
abortive things was to have these two UCLA
students develop this device. So we were mainly
involved in getting the work at sea underway and
designing and building equipment with our own
hands and with the assistance of one technician
there named Carl Johnson. He was a Scripps
technician, and he was very He would help us, and he
had a machine shop, and we would build this
equipment. Yeah, I have some questions I'd like to
ask you about the development of your devices.
What was the story behind the failure of the Vorney
hydrostatic core? What was its flaw that caused it
not to work? Well, it was, of course, based upon
using the hydrostatic pressure of the sea to drive
the piston. and drive the core barrel. And the
principle is valid. In any sort of a new
development like that, it's a lot more complex
than it seems. It isn't something you develop some
weekend or overnight. And it's quite proper for
the first, expectable nowadays, for the first
models not to work.
I think Shepard was very impatient about the whole
thing, and he is a man who likes devices with more
than one electronic tube or transistor, because
he was always, he was not mechanically inclined
himself, and the Varney-Redwine thing took a long
time to, was a fancy piece of equipment, and when it
was finally tested, it simply imploded and we just
came back with a frayed bitter end of the cable so it
isn't quite clear what happened but it apparently
did not withstand the hydrostatic pressures of
the ocean. Well what did you work on beside the
600-pound gravity core? Did you develop any other
devices in this period? No, I would say that was the
only sort of a
device which was in any way new. We did some
experiments with it, and we got involved in the
mechanics of coring. Emory and I wrote a paper
about it, but in the Geological Society of America
bulletin. But we developed snappers, but these
were not new. Emory developed a sediment trap,
which was a rather new device, and we designed
dredges and learned something about the
techniques of dredging and the amount of scope you
put out and the proper way to develop a dredge. But
we were developing dredges for collecting rocks,
and this was quite new. There were dredges for
collecting biological materials, and you always
try to avoid rock with these, but we were going
after the rock. So this was, this developing
dredges was, but we didn't really develop
anything new in the way of principles, we just
put the equipment together.